# Class Component

## Component Structure

1. **Constructor**: The constructor is a special method used to initialize the component's state and bind event handlers. It's the first method called when a component is created.

2. **Hooks or Lifecycle Functions**: In class components, lifecycle methods like `componentDidMount`, `componentDidUpdate`, and `componentWillUnmount` manage different aspects of the component's lifecycle. In functional components, hooks like `useState`, `useEffect`, and more achieve similar effects.

3. **Render Method**: The `render` method is responsible for returning the JSX (UI) to be displayed when the component is rendered. It's mandatory in class components and defines the component's visual output.
   whenever the `state changes`, the `render` method is called again.

Following this structure helps create well-organized and maintainable components in React applications. Note that with functional components and hooks, the use of lifecycle methods might differ, as hooks like `useEffect` can often achieve similar functionality.

## Hooks

### componentDidMount

- `componentDidMount` is a lifecycle method in React class components.

- It's called after the component is rendered to the DOM for the first time.

- Commonly used for tasks like data fetching, setting up subscriptions, or interacting with the DOM.

- Executed once during the component's lifecycle, right after the initial render.

- In `functional components`, similar effects can be achieved using the `useEffect` hook.

# Anonymous Functions

## Anonymous Functions

- **Definition:** Anonymous functions are functions defined without a name. They are often used inline as event handlers.
- **Usage:**
  ```jsx
  <button onClick={() => console.log("Clicked!")}>Click Me</button>
  ```

**_ Pros:_**
Convenient for short, simple tasks.

No need to define a separate function elsewhere in the code.

**_ Cons:_**

Can lead to unnecessary re-renders in components due to new function instances being created on each render.

function will be initialized each time when the component is rendered
in named function it will be initialized once and every event that will be called so it's more optimized

Debugging can be challenging, as they lack descriptive names in stack traces.

### Performance Impact

Anonymous functions can lead to unnecessary re-renders, as a new function is created each time the component renders. This can impact performance, especially in larger components.

```jsx
<button onClick={() => console.log("Clicked!")}>Click Me</button>
```

### Difficulty in Debugging

Debugging can become harder when using anonymous functions, as they don't have a descriptive name in stack traces, making it challenging to identify where the function was defined.

```jsx
<Component onClick={() => console.log("Clicked!")}>

```

### Readability and Maintainability

Overuse of anonymous functions can make code less readable and harder to maintain. Named functions provide better context and can be reused across the component.

## Named Functions

**Definition:** Named functions have a name assigned to them and are defined separately from their usage.
**Usage:**

```jsx
function handleClick() {
  console.log("Clicked!");
}
// ...
<button onClick={handleClick}>Click Me</button>;
```

**Pros:**
Better performance, as the same function instance can be reused across renders.

Easier debugging with descriptive names in stack traces.

Improved code readability and maintainability.

Can be unit tested more easily by referencing the function directly.

**Cons:**

Requires defining a function outside of the usage context, which might seem verbose for small tasks.

## React Component Writing Tips

- **Single Responsibility Principle (SRP):**

  - Keep components focused on a single task.

- **Reusable Components:**

  - Design components for reuse across the app.

- **Props and State:**

  - Props: Pass data from parent to child.
  - State: Manage component-specific changing data.
  - Lift state for shared data.

- **Functional Components and Hooks:**

  - Prefer functional components over class components.
  - Use Hooks for state and side effects.

- **Component Composition:**

  - Break UI into smaller, reusable components.

- **Props Validation:**

  - Use prop types or TypeScript for type validation.

- **Descriptive Variable Names:**

  - Use meaningful names for clarity.

- **Separation of Concerns:**

  - Keep UI and business logic separate.

- **Avoid Direct DOM Manipulation:**

  - Let React handle DOM updates.

- **Conditional Rendering:**

  - Show components based on conditions.

- **Optimize Rendering Performance:**

  - Use `React.memo`, `useCallback`, `useMemo`.

- **CSS and Styling:**

  - Use CSS-in-JS or CSS modules.
  - Scope styles to components.

- **Testing:**

  - Write tests for functionality and UI.
  - Use Jest and React Testing Library.

- **Documentation:**

  - Document component purpose, props, examples.

- **Error Handling:**

  - Implement error boundaries for graceful handling.

- **Accessibility (a11y):**

  - Ensure components are accessible.
  - Use semantic HTML, proper labels.

- **Continuously Learn:**
  - Practice, seek feedback, learn from others.

# Props in React

In React, "props" (short for properties) are a way to pass data from a parent component to a child component. They allow you to customize and configure child components by providing them with specific data and behavior. Props are read-only and cannot be modified by the child component.

## Passing Props from Parent to Child

In the parent component, when you render the child component, you can pass props as attributes:

```jsx
// ParentComponent.js
import React from "react";
import ChildComponent from "./ChildComponent";

const ParentComponent = () => {
  const name = "John";
  return <ChildComponent name={name} />;
};

export default ParentComponent;
```

## Receiving Props in Child Component

In the child component, you receive props as an object. You can access the passed props using the props object:

```jsx
// ChildComponent.js
import React from "react";

const ChildComponent = (props) => {
  return <div>Hello, {props.name}!</div>;
};

export default ChildComponent;
```

# React Render and Rerender

React components are the building blocks of your user interface. Understanding when and why components render (or rerender) is crucial for building efficient and performant applications.

## Initial Render on Component Mount

When a React component is first added to the DOM (mounted), React performs an initial render. This involves creating the component's virtual DOM representation and updating the actual DOM to reflect the component's structure and content.

## Rerender on State Change

React components can have state, which represents data that can change over time. When the state of a component changes (using the `setState` method or the `useState` hook), React automatically triggers a rerender of the component. During this rerender, React calculates the difference between the previous and current virtual DOM representations and updates the actual DOM accordingly. This ensures that the user interface reflects the updated state.

## Rerender on Props Change

React components often receive data from their parent components via props. If the props passed to a component change, React will also trigger a rerender of that component. This is important for ensuring that components display the correct data when their parent components provide new information.

## Optimizing Rerenders

While React's automatic rerendering mechanism is powerful, it's important to optimize your components to avoid unnecessary rerenders. Unoptimized rerenders can lead to decreased performance. To optimize rerenders, consider using techniques like:

- Using the `React.memo` higher-order component or `React.memo` function to memoize components and prevent rerenders when props don't change.
- Using the `useCallback` hook to memoize event handler functions and prevent them from being recreated on each render.
- Using the `useMemo` hook to memoize values that are calculated from expensive operations.

Understanding when React components render and rerender helps you write more efficient and responsive applications.

# CSS in React

When working with React, you have several options for applying CSS styles to your components. CSS can be applied using inline styles, CSS modules, CSS-in-JS libraries, and global styles. Here's an overview of these approaches:

## Inline Styles

You can apply inline styles directly to JSX elements using the `style` attribute. This involves passing an object with style properties and values as a prop. Inline styles are scoped to the component they are applied to and are often used for simple styling.

Example:

```jsx
const MyComponent = () => {
  const myStyle = {
    color: "blue",
    fontSize: "16px",
  };

  return <div style={myStyle}>Hello, world!</div>;
};
```

## CSS Modules

CSS Modules allow you to write traditional CSS files where each class name is scoped to a specific component. These class names are then accessed as properties of an imported object. This helps avoid global style conflicts and allows for better encapsulation.

Example:

```jsx
import styles from "./MyComponent.module.css";

const MyComponent = () => {
  return <div className={styles.myClass}>Hello, world!</div>;
};

// CSS file (MyComponent.module.css)
.myClass {
  color: blue;
  font-size: 16px;
}

```

## Global Styles

For applying global styles to your entire application, you can import and include a CSS file in your index.js or equivalent entry point.

Example (index.js):

```jsx
import React from "react";
import ReactDOM from "react-dom";
import "./index.css"; // Import global styles
import App from "./App";

ReactDOM.render(<App />, document.getElementById("root"));
```

# React Functional Component

## Pure function vs Impure function

- Pure functions always produce the same output for the same input.
- They have no side effects; they don't modify external state.
- Pure functions rely solely on their input parameters.
- They are predictable and easier to reason about.
- Pure functions facilitate testing and debugging.

- Impure functions may produce different outputs for the same input.
- They have side effects, such as modifying external variables or performing I/O operations.
- Impure functions can make code harder to understand and maintain.
- They are less predictable and may introduce unexpected behavior.
- Impure functions can be challenging to test and debug due to side effects.

**Pure Function Example:**

```javascript
// Pure function that adds two numbers
function add(a, b) {
  return a + b;
}

const result = add(3, 5); // Result is always 8, no side effects
```

In this example, the `add` function is pure because it takes two input parameters `a` and `b` and returns their sum without modifying any external state. It will always produce the same result (8 in this case) for the same input (3 and 5).

**Impure Function Example:**

```javascript
// Impure function that modifies an external variable
let total = 0;

function addToTotal(value) {
  total += value;
}

addToTotal(5); // Side effect: Changes the value of 'total'

// Impure function that generates a random number
function getRandomNumber() {
  return Math.random();
}

const randomValue = getRandomNumber(); // Result is not predictable

// In the first impure function `addToTotal`, it modifies the external variable `total`, which is a side effect. Calling `addToTotal(5)` changes the value of `total`.

// In the second impure function `getRandomNumber`, it relies on external state (the JavaScript runtime's random number generator) and can produce different results each time it's called, making it unpredictable.
```

## Side Effects in JavaScript:

Side effects are observable changes or actions that functions or operations perform, extending beyond their return values or outside scope modifying. They often involve modifying variables, performing I/O operations, or affecting external state.

1. **Modifying Variables:**

   - A common form of side effect is modifying variables outside a function's scope.
   - Example:

     ```javascript
     let counter = 0;

     function incrementCounter() {
       counter++;
     }

     incrementCounter(); // Side effect: Modifies the 'counter' variable.
     ```

2. **I/O Operations:**

   - I/O operations like file handling, network requests, and database access introduce side effects.
   - Example:
     ```javascript
     fetch("https://api.example.com/data")
       .then((response) => response.json())
       .then((data) => {
         // Side effect: Makes a network request and processes the response.
         console.log(data);
       });
     ```

3. **Console Logging:**

   - Logging to the console is a side effect as it provides observable output.
   - Example:

     ```javascript
     function logMessage(message) {
       console.log(message);
     }

     logMessage("Hello, world!"); // Side effect: Logs a message to the console.
     ```

4. **DOM Manipulation (Web Development):**

   - Changing the DOM affects the visible web page and is considered a side effect.
   - Example:
     ```javascript
     document.getElementById("myElement").textContent = "Updated content";
     ```

5. **Timers and Asynchronous Operations:**
   - Using timers or asynchronous operations can alter the order of execution, leading to side effects.
   - Example:
     ```javascript
     setTimeout(() => {
       // Side effect: Executes this code asynchronously after a delay.
       console.log("Delayed execution");
     }, 1000);
     ```

Understanding and managing side effects is crucial for writing predictable and maintainable JavaScript code.

# React functional and class components

- React class component re renders the render function only
- React functional component re renders all the function component.
  - Renders top to bottom.
  - If the state(useState) value is sate it wont re render function component.

# Circular Loop

```jsx
import React, { useState } from "react";

function CircularLoop() {
  const [count, setCount] = useState(0);

  // Start the interval when the component mounts
  setInterval(() => {
    setCount((prevCount) => (prevCount + 1) % 10); // Circular loop from 0 to 9
  }, 1000); // Update every second

  return (
    <div>
      <h1>Circular Loop</h1>
      <p>Count: {count}</p>
    </div>
  );
}

export default CircularLoop;
```
