# Chapter 2: Understanding Let,Const,Var

## Variables

## `var`:

- Function-scoped.
- Hoisted to the top of the function.
- Can be re-declared within the same scope.

## `let`:

- Block-scoped.
- Hoisted to the top of the block.
- Can be reassigned, but not re-declared within the same scope.

## `const`:

- Block-scoped.
- Must be initialized at the time of declaration.
- Cannot be reassigned or re-declared within the same scope.

## let and const:

- Hoisting to the Top of the Block:

  - The declaration of let variables is hoisted to the top of their block during compilation.
  - However, the initialization (assignment of a value) does not occur during hoisting.

- Temporal Dead Zone:

  - Accessing a let variable before its declaration results in a ReferenceError.
  - The variable exists in a "temporal dead zone" until its actual declaration.

- Reassignment Capability:
  - Once declared, let variables can be reassigned with new values within the same block scope.
- No Re-declaration:

  - Attempting to re-declare a let variable within the same block scope will result in an error.

- Encouraging Predictable Code:
  - The behavior of let promotes code predictability by preventing the use of variables before their declaration and encouraging a consistent coding style.

Variables declared with `let` and `const` are hoisted to the top of their block scope. Unlike var, they are not initialized (assigned a value) during hoisting. As a result, accessing the variable before its declaration will result in a ReferenceError.

Example:

```javascript
console.log(y); // Throws an error: 'ReferenceError: y is not defined'
let y = 10;
console.log(y); // Outputs '10'
```
